docs/developer-guide/core-ui-architecture.md, before:

---
sidebar_position: 2
description: An introduction about Pragtical's concepts
              and how they tie in to plugin development.
---

# Core UI Architecture

## Overview

Pragtical's UI is built on four core components that work together:

1. **Object** - OOP foundation
2. **View** - UI component base class
3. **Node** - Layout and container management
4. **RootView** - Top-level coordinator

## Object System

**File:** `data/core/object.lua`

Provides class-based inheritance for Lua.

### Usage

```lua
local Object = require "core.object"
local MyClass = Object:extend()

function MyClass:new(param) 
  -- `super` is a reference to the parent class, in this case `Object`
  -- IMPORTANT: Call super constructor first, use . instead of : and pass
  -- self explicitly, forgetting this call is a common mistake
  -- that can lead to uninitialized state and unexpected behavior
  MyClass.super.new(self)
  self.value = param
end

function MyClass:method()
  return self.value
end
```

### Key Methods

- `Object:extend()` - Create a subclass
- `Object:new(...)` - Constructor (override this)
- `Object:is(Type)` - Check exact type
- `Object:extends(Type)` - Check inheritance

## View System

**File:** `data/core/view.lua`

Base class for all UI components. Handles position, size, scrolling, events, and drawing.

### Key Properties

```lua
{
  position = { x, y },
  size = { x, y },
  scroll = { x, y, to = { x, y } },
  scrollable = boolean,
  cursor = "arrow" | "ibeam" | "sizeh" | "sizev" | "hand",
  context = "application" | "session"
}
```

### Lifecycle Methods

- `View:new()` - Constructor
- `View:update()` - Called each time a keyboard, mouse, resize event, etc... occurs, or core.redraw is set to true and the frames per second has not been exceeded
- `View:draw()` - Render the view
- `View:try_close(do_close)` - Handle close request

### Event Handlers

- `View:on_mouse_pressed(button, x, y, clicks)`
- `View:on_mouse_released(button, x, y)`
- `View:on_mouse_moved(x, y, dx, dy)`
- `View:on_mouse_wheel(y, x)`
- `View:on_text_input(text)`
- `View:on_file_dropped(filename, x, y)`

### Animation

```lua
-- Smoothly animate values
self:move_towards(self.scroll, "y", target_y, 0.3)
```

### Creating a Custom View

```lua
local View = require "core.view"
local MyView = View:extend()

function MyView:new()
  MyView.super.new(self)
  self.scrollable = true
end

function MyView:draw()
  self:draw_background(style.background)
  -- Custom drawing here
  self:draw_scrollbar()
end

function MyView:on_mouse_pressed(button, x, y, clicks)
  -- Handle input
  return true  -- Consume event
end
```

## Node System

**File:** `data/core/node.lua`

Manages layout using a tree structure. Nodes can contain views (tabs) or split into child nodes.

### Node Types

- `"leaf"` - Contains views as tabs
- `"hsplit"` - Horizontal split (left/right)
- `"vsplit"` - Vertical split (top/bottom)

### Key Properties

```lua
{
  type = "leaf" | "hsplit" | "vsplit",
  views = {},           -- Array of views (leaf nodes)
  active_view = View,   -- Currently active tab
  divider = 0.5,        -- Split ratio (0-1)
  a, b = Node, Node,    -- Child nodes (splits)
  locked = {x, y},      -- Fixed dimensions
  resizable = boolean
}
```

### Key Methods

- `Node:split(direction, view)` - Split node and add view
  - Direction: `"left"`, `"right"`, `"up"`, `"down"`
- `Node:add_view(view, idx)` - Add view as tab
- `Node:remove_view(root, view)` - Remove view
- `Node:set_active_view(view)` - Switch active tab
- `Node:get_node_for_view(view)` - Find containing node

### Usage

```lua
-- Get active node
local node = core.root_view:get_active_node()

-- Add view as tab
node:add_view(MyView())

-- Split and add view
node:split("right", MyView())
```

## RootView

**File:** `data/core/rootview.lua`

Top-level view that manages the entire UI. Routes events and handles global operations.

### Key Methods

- `RootView:get_active_node()` - Node with focus
- `RootView:get_primary_node()` - Main document area
- `RootView:open_doc(doc)` - Open document
- `RootView:grab_mouse(button, view)` - Capture mouse input
- `RootView:ungrab_mouse(button)` - Release capture

### Event Flow

```
OS Event
  → RootView (routes to node/view under mouse)
    → Node (delegates to active view)
      → View (handles or returns false)
```

## DocView

**File:** `data/core/docview.lua`

The text editor view. Most complex view implementation.

### Features

- Syntax highlighting
- Multiple cursors
- Line numbers gutter
- Horizontal and vertical scrolling
- IME support

### Key Methods

- `DocView:get_line_screen_position(line, col)` - Doc to screen coords
- `DocView:resolve_screen_position(x, y)` - Screen to doc coords
- `DocView:scroll_to_line(line)` - Scroll to line
- `DocView:scroll_to_make_visible(line, col)` - Ensure visible

## Common View Implementations

- `EmptyView` (`data/core/emptyview.lua`) - Welcome screen
- `StatusView` (`data/core/statusview.lua`) - Status bar
- `CommandView` (`data/core/commandview.lua`) - Command palette
- `LogView` (`data/core/logview.lua`) - Log viewer
- `NagView` (`data/core/nagview.lua`) - Dialogs/modals
- `TitleView` (`data/core/titleview.lua`) - Title bar
- `TreeView` (`data/plugins/treeview.lua`) - File tree sidebar

## Architecture Diagram

```
Object (OOP base)
  │
  └─ View (UI component)
      ├─ RootView (coordinator)
      ├─ DocView (text editor)
      ├─ StatusView
      ├─ EmptyView
      └─ ...

Node Tree (layout):
  RootView.root_node
    ├─ Node (hsplit)
    │   ├─ Node (leaf) → [View1, View2]  # Tabs
    │   └─ Node (vsplit)
    │       ├─ Node (leaf) → [View3]
    │       └─ Node (leaf) → [View4]
```

## Update/Draw Cycle

Every frame (typically 60 FPS):

```
1. Update Phase:
   RootView:update()
     └─ Node:update() (recursive)
         └─ View:update()

2. Draw Phase:
   RootView:draw()
     └─ Node:draw() (recursive)
         └─ View:draw()
```

## Context System

Views have a `context` property:

- `"application"` - Persists across sessions (toolbar, status bar)
- `"session"` - Tied to project (document views, tree view)

When closing a project, only `"session"` context views are closed.

## Mouse Grab Pattern

For drag operations, views can capture mouse input:

```lua
function MyView:on_mouse_pressed(button, x, y, clicks)
  core.root_view:grab_mouse("left", self)
  return true
end

function MyView:on_mouse_released(button, x, y)
  core.root_view:ungrab_mouse("left")
  return true
end

-- While grabbed, all mouse events go to this view
```

## Best Practices

1. **Always call super methods** when overriding
   ```lua
   function MyView:update()
     MyView.super.update(self)
     -- Your update logic
   end
   ```

2. **Use move_towards for animations** instead of direct assignment
   ```lua
   self:move_towards(self.scroll, "y", target, 0.3)
   ```

3. **Return true from event handlers** to consume events
   ```lua
   function MyView:on_mouse_pressed(...)
     -- Handle event
     return true  -- Prevent event propagation
   end
   ```

4. **Draw background and scrollbar** in custom views
   ```lua
   function MyView:draw()
     self:draw_background(style.background)
     -- Content
     self:draw_scrollbar()
   end
   ```

5. **Set scrollable property** if view needs scrolling
   ```lua
   function MyView:new()
     MyView.super.new(self)
     self.scrollable = true
   end
   ```

### Coordinate Systems

When working with positions, be aware of different coordinate spaces:

1. **Screen coordinates**: Absolute pixel positions in the window (e.g., mouse x, y)
2. **Content coordinates**: Positions relative to view content, accounting for scroll offset
3. **Document coordinates**: Line and column positions in text (e.g., line 5, column 10)

**Conversion methods:**

Screen ↔ Document:
- `DocView:resolve_screen_position(x, y)` → `(line, col)` - Convert screen pixels to document position
- `DocView:get_line_screen_position(line, col)` → `(x, y)` - Convert document position to screen pixels

Content offset helpers:
- `View:get_content_offset()` → `(x, y)` - Get top-left corner of content area in screen coordinates (accounts for scroll)
- `View:get_content_bounds()` → `(x1, y1, x2, y2)` - Get visible content rectangle in content coordinates

Document column ↔ X offset within line:
- `DocView:get_col_x_offset(line, col)` → `xoffset` - Get horizontal pixel offset for a column position
- `DocView:get_x_offset_col(line, x)` → `col` - Get column position from horizontal pixel offset


### Notes
- **Variable FPS** To lower cpu usage, the editor does not run at a constant FPS. The configured `config.fps` is basically the maximum allowed frames per second.
- **Line Caching**: DocView implements column-to-x-offset caching for lines longer than 500 characters (defined by `CACHE_LINE_LEN`). This significantly improves performance on extremely long lines.
- **Visible Range Optimization**: Views only draw and update content that's visible on screen. Use `DocView:get_visible_line_range()` and `DocView:get_visible_cols_range()` when implementing plugins that process document content.
- **Font Tab Size**: When working with fonts, remember to call `font:set_tab_size(indent_size)` to ensure proper tab rendering. DocView handles this automatically for syntax highlighting.
Coordinate Systems

Debugging Tips

- Enable development tools in Settings → Development to see:
  - Current FPS and frame timing
  - Repainted screen regions
  - View boundaries and clipping rectangle
  - Log slow coroutines
- Use `core.log()` or `core.error()` for logging (visible in LogView)
- Check `core.active_view` to verify which view has focus
- Inspect `core.root_view.root_node` tree structure when debugging layout issue

Commit message:

add note about not updating/views when they aren't visible

docs/developer-guide/core-ui-architecture.md, after:

---
sidebar_position: 2
description: An introduction about Pragtical's concepts
              and how they tie in to plugin development.
---

# Core UI Architecture

## Overview

Pragtical's UI is built on four core components that work together:

1. **Object** - OOP foundation
2. **View** - UI component base class
3. **Node** - Layout and container management
4. **RootView** - Top-level coordinator

## Object System

**File:** `data/core/object.lua`

Provides class-based inheritance for Lua.

### Usage

```lua
local Object = require "core.object"
local MyClass = Object:extend()

function MyClass:new(param) 
  -- `super` is a reference to the parent class, in this case `Object`
  -- IMPORTANT: Call super constructor first, use . instead of : and pass
  -- self explicitly, forgetting this call is a common mistake
  -- that can lead to uninitialized state and unexpected behavior
  MyClass.super.new(self)
  self.value = param
end

function MyClass:method()
  return self.value
end
```

### Key Methods

- `Object:extend()` - Create a subclass
- `Object:new(...)` - Constructor (override this)
- `Object:is(Type)` - Check exact type
- `Object:extends(Type)` - Check inheritance

## View System

**File:** `data/core/view.lua`

Base class for all UI components. Handles position, size, scrolling, events, and drawing.

### Key Properties

```lua
{
  position = { x, y },
  size = { x, y },
  scroll = { x, y, to = { x, y } },
  scrollable = boolean,
  cursor = "arrow" | "ibeam" | "sizeh" | "sizev" | "hand",
  context = "application" | "session"
}
```

### Lifecycle Methods

- `View:new()` - Constructor
- `View:update()` - Called each time a keyboard, mouse, resize event, etc... occurs, or core.redraw is set to true and the frames per second has not been exceeded
- `View:draw()` - Render the view
- `View:try_close(do_close)` - Handle close request

### Event Handlers

- `View:on_mouse_pressed(button, x, y, clicks)`
- `View:on_mouse_released(button, x, y)`
- `View:on_mouse_moved(x, y, dx, dy)`
- `View:on_mouse_wheel(y, x)`
- `View:on_text_input(text)`
- `View:on_file_dropped(filename, x, y)`

### Animation

```lua
-- Smoothly animate values
self:move_towards(self.scroll, "y", target_y, 0.3)
```

### Creating a Custom View

```lua
local View = require "core.view"
local MyView = View:extend()

function MyView:new()
  MyView.super.new(self)
  self.scrollable = true
end

function MyView:draw()
  self:draw_background(style.background)
  -- Custom drawing here
  self:draw_scrollbar()
end

function MyView:on_mouse_pressed(button, x, y, clicks)
  -- Handle input
  return true  -- Consume event
end
```

## Node System

**File:** `data/core/node.lua`

Manages layout using a tree structure. Nodes can contain views (tabs) or split into child nodes.

### Node Types

- `"leaf"` - Contains views as tabs
- `"hsplit"` - Horizontal split (left/right)
- `"vsplit"` - Vertical split (top/bottom)

### Key Properties

```lua
{
  type = "leaf" | "hsplit" | "vsplit",
  views = {},           -- Array of views (leaf nodes)
  active_view = View,   -- Currently active tab
  divider = 0.5,        -- Split ratio (0-1)
  a, b = Node, Node,    -- Child nodes (splits)
  locked = {x, y},      -- Fixed dimensions
  resizable = boolean
}
```

### Key Methods

- `Node:split(direction, view)` - Split node and add view
  - Direction: `"left"`, `"right"`, `"up"`, `"down"`
- `Node:add_view(view, idx)` - Add view as tab
- `Node:remove_view(root, view)` - Remove view
- `Node:set_active_view(view)` - Switch active tab
- `Node:get_node_for_view(view)` - Find containing node

### Usage

```lua
-- Get active node
local node = core.root_view:get_active_node()

-- Add view as tab
node:add_view(MyView())

-- Split and add view
node:split("right", MyView())
```

## RootView

**File:** `data/core/rootview.lua`

Top-level view that manages the entire UI. Routes events and handles global operations.

### Key Methods

- `RootView:get_active_node()` - Node with focus
- `RootView:get_primary_node()` - Main document area
- `RootView:open_doc(doc)` - Open document
- `RootView:grab_mouse(button, view)` - Capture mouse input
- `RootView:ungrab_mouse(button)` - Release capture

### Event Flow

```
OS Event
  → RootView (routes to node/view under mouse)
    → Node (delegates to active view)
      → View (handles or returns false)
```

## DocView

**File:** `data/core/docview.lua`

The text editor view. Most complex view implementation.

### Features

- Syntax highlighting
- Multiple cursors
- Line numbers gutter
- Horizontal and vertical scrolling
- IME support

### Key Methods

- `DocView:get_line_screen_position(line, col)` - Doc to screen coords
- `DocView:resolve_screen_position(x, y)` - Screen to doc coords
- `DocView:scroll_to_line(line)` - Scroll to line
- `DocView:scroll_to_make_visible(line, col)` - Ensure visible

## Common View Implementations

- `EmptyView` (`data/core/emptyview.lua`) - Welcome screen
- `StatusView` (`data/core/statusview.lua`) - Status bar
- `CommandView` (`data/core/commandview.lua`) - Command palette
- `LogView` (`data/core/logview.lua`) - Log viewer
- `NagView` (`data/core/nagview.lua`) - Dialogs/modals
- `TitleView` (`data/core/titleview.lua`) - Title bar
- `TreeView` (`data/plugins/treeview.lua`) - File tree sidebar

## Architecture Diagram

```
Object (OOP base)
  │
  └─ View (UI component)
      ├─ RootView (coordinator)
      ├─ DocView (text editor)
      ├─ StatusView
      ├─ EmptyView
      └─ ...

Node Tree (layout):
  RootView.root_node
    ├─ Node (hsplit)
    │   ├─ Node (leaf) → [View1, View2]  # Tabs
    │   └─ Node (vsplit)
    │       ├─ Node (leaf) → [View3]
    │       └─ Node (leaf) → [View4]
```

## Update/Draw Cycle

Every frame (typically 60 FPS):

```
1. Update Phase:
   RootView:update()
     └─ Node:update() (recursive)
         └─ View:update()

2. Draw Phase:
   RootView:draw()
     └─ Node:draw() (recursive)
         └─ View:draw()
```

## Context System

Views have a `context` property:

- `"application"` - Persists across sessions (toolbar, status bar)
- `"session"` - Tied to project (document views, tree view)

When closing a project, only `"session"` context views are closed.

## Mouse Grab Pattern

For drag operations, views can capture mouse input:

```lua
function MyView:on_mouse_pressed(button, x, y, clicks)
  core.root_view:grab_mouse("left", self)
  return true
end

function MyView:on_mouse_released(button, x, y)
  core.root_view:ungrab_mouse("left")
  return true
end

-- While grabbed, all mouse events go to this view
```

## Best Practices

1. **Always call super methods** when overriding
   ```lua
   function MyView:update()
     MyView.super.update(self)
     -- Your update logic
   end
   ```

2. **Use move_towards for animations** instead of direct assignment
   ```lua
   self:move_towards(self.scroll, "y", target, 0.3)
   ```

3. **Return true from event handlers** to consume events
   ```lua
   function MyView:on_mouse_pressed(...)
     -- Handle event
     return true  -- Prevent event propagation
   end
   ```

4. **Draw background and scrollbar** in custom views
   ```lua
   function MyView:draw()
     self:draw_background(style.background)
     -- Content
     self:draw_scrollbar()
   end
   ```

5. **Set scrollable property** if view needs scrolling
   ```lua
   function MyView:new()
     MyView.super.new(self)
     self.scrollable = true
   end
   ```

### Coordinate Systems

When working with positions, be aware of different coordinate spaces:

1. **Screen coordinates**: Absolute pixel positions in the window (e.g., mouse x, y)
2. **Content coordinates**: Positions relative to view content, accounting for scroll offset
3. **Document coordinates**: Line and column positions in text (e.g., line 5, column 10)

**Conversion methods:**

Screen ↔ Document:
- `DocView:resolve_screen_position(x, y)` → `(line, col)` - Convert screen pixels to document position
- `DocView:get_line_screen_position(line, col)` → `(x, y)` - Convert document position to screen pixels

Content offset helpers:
- `View:get_content_offset()` → `(x, y)` - Get top-left corner of content area in screen coordinates (accounts for scroll)
- `View:get_content_bounds()` → `(x1, y1, x2, y2)` - Get visible content rectangle in content coordinates

Document column ↔ X offset within line:
- `DocView:get_col_x_offset(line, col)` → `xoffset` - Get horizontal pixel offset for a column position
- `DocView:get_x_offset_col(line, x)` → `col` - Get column position from horizontal pixel offset


### Notes
- **Variable FPS** To lower cpu usage, the editor does not run at a constant FPS. The configured `config.fps` is basically the maximum allowed frames per second. Pragtical also prevents calling the update and draw methods of views when they aren't visible (by checking if their size is 0) to save cpu cycles.
- **Line Caching**: DocView implements column-to-x-offset caching for lines longer than 500 characters (defined by `CACHE_LINE_LEN`). This significantly improves performance on extremely long lines.
- **Visible Range Optimization**: Views only draw and update content that's visible on screen. Use `DocView:get_visible_line_range()` and `DocView:get_visible_cols_range()` when implementing plugins that process document content.
- **Font Tab Size**: When working with fonts, remember to call `font:set_tab_size(indent_size)` to ensure proper tab rendering. DocView handles this automatically for syntax highlighting.
Coordinate Systems

Debugging Tips

- Enable development tools in Settings → Development to see:
  - Current FPS and frame timing
  - Repainted screen regions
  - View boundaries and clipping rectangle
  - Log slow coroutines
- Use `core.log()` or `core.error()` for logging (visible in LogView)
- Check `core.active_view` to verify which view has focus
- Inspect `core.root_view.root_node` tree structure when debugging layout issue
