docs/intro.md, before:

---
sidebar_position: 1
description: Welcome to Pragtical!
---

# Introduction

**Pragtical** - The practical and pragmatic code editor.

![screenshot](/img/gallery/1.png)

Pragtical is a cross-platform code editor with a modern graphical interface,
developed using C and Lua(JIT), powered by [SDL] for rendering and input
management. It serves as a lightweight alternative to web-based editors like
VSCode and can be easily extended or themed with Lua plugins.

It supports syntax highlighting for various programming languages, thanks to
contributions from the community, and adding new languages is straightforward.
Some of its core features include:

- Auto-completion
- Graphical and advanced configuration using Lua
- Support for multiple file encodings
- Multi-threaded project-wide find and replace
- A command palette for a keyboard-focused workflow
- Graphical and keyboard-driven file navigation
- Customizable key bindings
- Changeable color schemes with easy creation of custom schemes
- A flexible plugin architecture for extending functionality

Examples of functionality added as plugins:

- [LSP] (implementing Language Server Protocol support for intellisense)
- [EditorConfig]
- [Integrated Terminal]
- [Code Formatters]
- [Source Control Management] (Git and Fossil)
- and more (https://github.com/pragtical/plugins)...

## History

Originally, **Pragtical** was forked from [Lite XL] (which is also a fork of [lite])
with a focus on being practical rather than minimalist. Over time, it has gained
its own identity with various features and improvements not available in its
predecessors. If you're interested, some of the reasons for the fork are explained
[here](https://github.com/pragtical/pragtical/issues/6#issuecomment-1581650875).

## Name

The name was chosen as a counter-response to the approach taken by its
immediate predecessor. It is a mixture of the words `pragmatic` and `practical`,
two words that properly define our development approach as follows:

* governed through practice or action, rather than theory, speculation or idealism
* willing to see things as they really are and deal with them sensibly

As a result we belief that new features introduced through pull requests should
be evaluated taking a practical approach, without going into lenghty idealistic
discussions that slowdown progress, merging code when logical.

## Goals

We differentiate ourselves from our predecessors by striving to make Pragtical
an editor that enhances the feature set, providing both you and us with a better
out-of-the-box experience while maintaining a focus on performance and ease of
extensibility. Additionally, we have simplified the release process by reducing
the number of builds to choose from and adopting a more frequent release approach.

### Performance

Over time, Pragtical has adopted various enhancements for better editor
performance, some of them are:

* **JIT** - Pragtical takes a LuaJIT first approach, meaning that our official
builds use LuaJIT instead of PUC Lua for the performance benefits that come
with it. Also having a LuaJIT first approach gives us FFI for free which allows
easy interfacing with native C libraries for easier plugin development. LuaJIT
has proven to be a mature Lua implementation that will provide a stable
development ecosystem for the foreseeable future.

* **Threading** - a supported feature inside the core on components where it is
practical to use, like file searching and replacing, where performance gains are
evident.

* **Improved Job Scheduling** - internally the editor uses Lua coroutines
to perform different types of task, the way these tasks are scheduled has been
improved on Pragtical to provide better editor responsiveness.

### More Features

Some of the additional features and enhancements include:

* **Widgets** - more tightly integrated as part of the core for easier gui
development and reusability, also ensuring that plugin developers can with
more ease develop user interfaces when in need.

* **Settings UI** - if you are not using a terminal editor like n/vim it means
you are looking for a more point and click approach which is why we include a
graphical interface to adjust your preferences out of the box. But don't
worry, configuring the editor through Lua will keep working because it is also
pragtical 😉

* **Encoding** - while UTF-8 has overtaken as the preferred encoding for text
documents for its convenience, we can sometimes encounter a document in another
encoding. Loading and saving documents with different encodings will be
supported for when the need arrives, a feature that is also commonly found in
other editors because it is pragtical.

* **IPC** - shared memory functionality is part of the core and IPC plugin
shipped by default to allow opening files and tab dragging between currently
opened instances.

* **[CLI]** - Integrated command line interface API that can be extended by
plugins to provide new CLI flags.

* **Search/Replace** - Project-wide search and replace support, better user
interface for both documents and project search/replace.


[CLI]:                       /docs/user-guide/cli
[SDL]:                       https://www.libsdl.org/
[LSP]:                       /plugins?plugin=lsp
[EditorConfig]:              /plugins?plugin=editorconfig
[Integrated Terminal]:       /plugins?plugin=terminal
[Code Formatters]:           /plugins?plugin=formatter
[Source Control Management]: /plugins?plugin=scm
[Lite XL]:                   https://github.com/lite-xl/lite-xl
[lite]:                      https://github.com/rxi/lite

Commit message:

Added diff viewer and api to docs

docs/intro.md, after:

---
sidebar_position: 1
description: Welcome to Pragtical!
---

# Introduction

**Pragtical** - The practical and pragmatic code editor.

![screenshot](/img/gallery/1.png)

Pragtical is a cross-platform code editor with a modern graphical interface,
developed using C and Lua(JIT), powered by [SDL] for rendering and input
management. It serves as a lightweight alternative to web-based editors like
VSCode and can be easily extended or themed with Lua plugins.

It supports syntax highlighting for various programming languages, thanks to
contributions from the community, and adding new languages is straightforward.
Some of its core features include:

- Auto-completion
- Graphical and advanced configuration using Lua
- Support for multiple file encodings
- Multi-threaded project-wide find and replace
- A command palette for a keyboard-focused workflow
- Graphical and keyboard-driven file navigation
- Customizable key bindings
- Changeable color schemes with easy creation of custom schemes
- A flexible plugin architecture for extending functionality

Examples of functionality added as plugins:

- [LSP] (implementing Language Server Protocol support for intellisense)
- [EditorConfig]
- [Integrated Terminal]
- [Code Formatters]
- [Source Control Management] (Git and Fossil)
- and more (https://github.com/pragtical/plugins)...

## History

Originally, **Pragtical** was forked from [Lite XL] (which is also a fork of [lite])
with a focus on being practical rather than minimalist. Over time, it has gained
its own identity with various features and improvements not available in its
predecessors. If you're interested, some of the reasons for the fork are explained
[here](https://github.com/pragtical/pragtical/issues/6#issuecomment-1581650875).

## Name

The name was chosen as a counter-response to the approach taken by its
immediate predecessor. It is a mixture of the words `pragmatic` and `practical`,
two words that properly define our development approach as follows:

* governed through practice or action, rather than theory, speculation or idealism
* willing to see things as they really are and deal with them sensibly

As a result we belief that new features introduced through pull requests should
be evaluated taking a practical approach, without going into lengthy idealistic
discussions that slowdown progress, merging code when logical.

## Goals

We differentiate ourselves from our predecessors by striving to make Pragtical
an editor that enhances the feature set, providing both you and us with a better
out-of-the-box experience while maintaining a focus on performance and ease of
extensibility. Additionally, we have simplified the release process by reducing
the number of builds to choose from and adopting a more frequent release approach.

### Performance

Over time, Pragtical has adopted various enhancements for better editor
performance, some of them are:

* **JIT** - Pragtical takes a LuaJIT first approach, meaning that our official
builds use LuaJIT instead of PUC Lua for the performance benefits that come
with it. Also having a LuaJIT first approach gives us FFI for free which allows
easy interfacing with native C libraries for easier plugin development. LuaJIT
has proven to be a mature Lua implementation that will provide a stable
development ecosystem for the foreseeable future.

* **Threading** - a supported feature inside the core on components where it is
practical to use, like file searching and replacing, where performance gains are
evident.

* **Improved Job Scheduling** - internally the editor uses Lua coroutines
to perform different types of task, the way these tasks are scheduled has been
improved on Pragtical to provide better editor responsiveness.

### More Features

Some of the additional features and enhancements include:

* **Widgets** - more tightly integrated as part of the core for easier gui
development and reusability, also ensuring that plugin developers can with
more ease develop user interfaces when in need.

* **Settings UI** - if you are not using a terminal editor like n/vim it means
you are looking for a more point and click approach which is why we include a
graphical interface to adjust your preferences out of the box. But don't
worry, configuring the editor through Lua will keep working because it is also
pragtical 😉

* **Encoding** - while UTF-8 has overtaken as the preferred encoding for text
documents for its convenience, we can sometimes encounter a document in another
encoding. Loading and saving documents with different encodings will be
supported for when the need arrives, a feature that is also commonly found in
other editors because it is pragtical.

* **IPC** - shared memory functionality is part of the core and IPC plugin
shipped by default to allow opening files and tab dragging between currently
opened instances.

* **[CLI]** - Integrated command line interface API that can be extended by
plugins to provide new CLI flags.

* **Search/Replace** - Project-wide search and replace support, better user
interface for both documents and project search/replace.

* **Built-in [Diff Viewer]** - A file or strings diff viewer that lets
easily navigate and synchronize the differences. The functionality is
expanded by the [Source Control Management] where it will let you compare
your current checkout file to an older version on the commit history.


[CLI]:                       /docs/user-guide/cli
[Diff Viewer]:               /docs/user-guide/diff-viewer
[SDL]:                       https://www.libsdl.org/
[LSP]:                       /plugins?plugin=lsp
[EditorConfig]:              /plugins?plugin=editorconfig
[Integrated Terminal]:       /plugins?plugin=terminal
[Code Formatters]:           /plugins?plugin=formatter
[Source Control Management]: /plugins?plugin=scm
[Lite XL]:                   https://github.com/lite-xl/lite-xl
[lite]:                      https://github.com/rxi/lite
